The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pioneer Auto Museum and Antique Village, by
Dick Geisler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Pioneer Auto Museum and Antique Village
       Murdo, South Dakota

Author: Dick Geisler

Release Date: June 7, 2021 [eBook #65547]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM AND ANTIQUE
VILLAGE ***




                          PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM
                                  and
                              ANTIQUE TOWN


                          Murdo, South Dakota


PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM and A. J. “Dick” Geisler are a single thought in the
minds of many who have visited and had the chance to know the man with
the ever-present cigar. A Valentine present to German immigrant parents,
Dick knew he and the family farm were not cut out for each other. He
attended a rural school near New Ulm, Minnesota much like the one that
is part of the museum. After high school his mother’s plans for business
college for her son were interrupted by a job selling for the Jewel Tea
Company, and other sales ventures. In 1923 he and a friend drove a Ford
like the one to be seen in the Ford Garage from Minnesota to California
taking odd jobs along the way to finance the trip.

In California he met and married Vivian Petersen who had traveled to
California with her three sisters. The three Geisler children were born
in Pasadena where “Dick” was operating the feed, hardware and appliance
business he started in the height of the depression. In 1942 Mr. Geisler
traded his California home for a farm near Blunt, South Dakota, sold the
businesses and returned to the Midwest.

Crops had been nonexistent for some years prior to his move to South
Dakota and the natives were amused at the West coast city dude who
busily went about planting wheat. The Geisler touch and ideal conditions
brought about the first of many banner years for crops in the area.

In 1945 “Dick” bought a John Deere Chevrolet dealership in Murdo and
moved his family once again. In 1950 he opened the Phillips 66 gas
station at the junction of U.S. 16 and 83. The embryo of the PIONEER
AUTO MUSEUM took shape in the form of an old buggy and a 1913 Ford
Peddler’s Wagon (now located in the Ford Garage) which were parked in
front of the station and elicited considerable comment from tourists. As
the years rolled by a vintage car here and an antique there were added
to “Dick’s” small but growing collection. Dick’s son, John, made the
first trip to pick up a car back east. Upon returning, John told his
father about other cars to be had. By ones and twos the collection grew
to where something had to be done to properly store and show the cars.

                   Pub. by The Goin Company, Box 746
                      Mitchell, South Dakota 57301

                                MADE BY
                              DEXTER PRESS
                          WEST NYACK, NEW YORK

    [Illustration: Pioneer Auto Museum
    Murdo, South Dakota]

                         Buildings as Numbered
  1. Main building and entrance. Autos and coin music machines.
  2. Auto building.
  3. Autos, motorcycles and bicycles building.
  4. Auto storage shed.
  5. 1910 Cretors popcorn wagon.
  6. Souvenir and gift shop.
  7. World’s largest concert band organ.
  8. Church of the prairie.
  9. 1911 Parker Brothers merry-go-round.
  10. Henry’s Ford Garage.
  11. Livery stable.
  12. Classic car building.
  13. Auto building. (mainly Overland, Willys, Kaiser-Frazer)
  14. Machinery area.
  15. Tractor area.
  16. Fire station.
  17. Kozy Tourist Cabin.
  18. Depot. (display of stoves, dentist’s office, saloon)
  19. One-room school house.
  20. Milwaukee Road Caboose.
  21. General store.
  22. Circus display room.
  23. Restrooms.
  24. Jack’s Jewelry store.
  25. Homesteader’s shack.
  26. Murdo State Bank.
  27. Blacksmith Shop.
  28. Barber Shop.
  29. Murdo Jail.
  30. Gasoline engine and plow display.
  31. Wells Fargo stagecoach.
  32. Exit building. (Autos, style-show, glassware, antique toys,
          telephones, emblems, miscellaneous antiques and other items)
  33. Storage and restoration building. (closed to public)
  34. Auto and parts boneyard.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: 1903 Cadillac

    With $750.00 you were in the driver’s seat of this gem in 1903. This
    first model made by the Cadillac Motor Car Co. of Detroit sported a
    single cylinder, under-the-floor mounted engine with a two speed
    transmission.]

    [Illustration: 1908 Brush

    This two passenger runabout was one of the popular models of its
    day. Built between 1907-1913, it had a wooden frame and wooden
    axles, coil springs on all four wheels and was chain driven. Its
    single cylinder 12 H.P. engine cranked counterclockwise. Sold new
    for $485.00. NOTE: The same man, Alanson P. Brush, designed the
    engines for both the Cadillac and Brush described on this page.]

    [Illustration: Long Green Car

    Long enough to be a 32 cylinder monstrosity, this 1926 Nash was
    especially built as an eye-catcher. In identifying the Pioneer Auto
    Museum, reference is often made to this car.]

    [Illustration: A Lineup of Old-Timers

    A sample of man’s mechanical genius found in the Pioneer Auto
    Museum. In this lineup, left to right, can be seen a Model T,
    Flanders, Spacke, and Schacht.]




                         Antiques of Yesteryear


ANTIQUE CARS

Wide variances of opinion exist as to what constitutes an antique car.
To those unknowledgeable in history of the automobile it is often merely
a relative description of an old car. The Veteran Motor Car Club of
America classifies any car over 35 years old as antique. The Antique
Automobile Club of America considers all pre-1930 models qualifying as
antiques. The Horseless Carriage Club limit their choices for antique
designation to pre-1916 cars. As we said, the term is somewhat relative.

    [Illustration: 1912 Chalmers

    This high-wheeled, 4 cylinder speedster is a fine example of an
    early sports car. In 1910 Chalmers won the Glidden Trophy.]

    [Illustration: 1909 Fuller

    In 1909 and 1910 two companies were producing autos with the Fuller
    name—The Angus Automobile Company of Angus, Nebraska and the Fuller
    Buggy Company of Jackson, Michigan. The inflatable tires identify
    this model as being made in Jackson, Michigan.]

    [Illustration: 1912 Cadillac

    This gleaming blue beauty must have brought joy to the heart of its
    first owner. The brass lamps and leather workings show great care.
    Note the early “bucket” seats.]

    [Illustration: 1906 “N” Ford

    This early model come off the line just three years after Henry Ford
    produced his first auto. It is the first car to be seen as you enter
    Henry’s Ford Garage.]

    [Illustration: 1902 Oldsmobile

    This curved dash Olds was powered by a single cylinder engine and
    steered with a tiller. It was the world’s first mass produced
    automobile.]

    [Illustration: 1902 Schacht

    A 1902 gem with double chain drive. This hard wheeler was one of the
    earlier models with a steering wheel. Note the hand crank in back
    for the rear-mounted motor.]

    [Illustration: 1917 Hupmobile Roadster

    Very few of this model are found today. This 4 cylinder roadster was
    capable of 45 miles an hour and sold for $1,265.00 new. What is now
    known as the antique era was rapidly coming to a close and many of
    the refinements of production efficiency can be noted on this car.]

    [Illustration: 1910 Flanders

    The Flanders was marketed by Studebaker and remained unchanged for
    the years of its manufacture, 1909-1912. It has a 4 cylinder engine
    and a 3 speed transmission. This model was noted for its
    mother-in-law seat, a single seat in the rear.]

    [Illustration: 1909 Auburn Touring

    If cars could speak, this particular Auburn could tell much of the
    early history and settling of Central South Dakota. It was used for
    many years to transport settlers to their claims, some a full day’s
    ride from Murdo. Fully restored in early 1971, it is now on
    display.]

    [Illustration: Autos On Review

    From left to right—1914 Ford Touring, 1917 Crow-Elkhart, 1913
    Hupmobile and a 1913 Ford Speedster.]




                           The Vintage Years


Following World War I cars that had remained drawing board dreams sprung
into reality. Faster production methods had evolved from the war and
were now applied to the auto industry. New techniques for making lighter
alloys were brought into use and new advances in the theory of the
internal combustion engine were tested and applied. The result was a
selection of autos superior to those of the previous period.

Production had passed from experiment to refinement. Efficiency was the
byword with great care given in the construction of each unit during
that post-war period. Mass production sounded the death knell for the
short-lived Vintage Years which, it is generally agreed, lasted from
1919 to 1930.

    [Illustration: 1922 Essex

    This Essex, manufactured by the Hudson Motor Car Company from
    1918-1932, was a low-priced, four cylinder car. However, it was very
    popular and was noted for its remarkable acceleration and top
    speed.]

    [Illustration: 1922 Star Touring

    Even the best of the Vintage Years autos had their bad moments.
    Experienced mechanics were few and far between in some parts of the
    country. Usually the local blacksmith could be depended upon for a
    piece of bailing wire and a fair repair job, as on this 1922 Star.]

    [Illustration: 1927 Willys-Knight

    Willys-Knight was most notable for its double-sleeve-valve engine.
    Purchase price for this model was $1,400.00.]

    [Illustration: 1922 Stutz Touring

    You were really “IN” back in the “Roaring 20’s” with this sporty
    wire-wheeled model. This is a blood-brother to the famous Stutz
    Bearcat of early sports car fame.]

    [Illustration: 1922 Mercer Touring

    The tour cylinder Mercer was one of the fastest cars of its day.
    Note the wire wheels and the two spare tires at the rear. All four
    doors opened from the inside only.]

    [Illustration: 1928 Paige-Detroit

    This six cylinder four door sedan was one of the last cars made by
    the Paige Company which merged with the Graham Brothers Company the
    next year forming the Graham-Paige Company. Notice the three-tone
    paint job.]

    [Illustration: Henry’s Ford Garage

    Henry’s Garage displays 18 early Fords from the 1906 Model “N”
    through the Model A”. A parts room duplicating the organized mess of
    the early Ford parts department and a display of tools used to work
    on these wonders which would go miles with baling wire or a hair pin
    holding them together.]

    [Illustration: 1913 Overland

    Mr. Geisler is sentimental about every car in his collection but
    this one has a special place in his heart. Can you remember the
    first car you ever drove?—Here is the first car Dick Geisler drove,
    now restored to prize winning condition. It was judged the finest
    example of restoration in 1963 and received a first place trophy at
    the national meet held by the Antique Automobile Club of America
    that year.]




                              Classic Cars


What does set apart a true classic from a standard production car? Two
things in principle: Brilliant and unusual design coupled with the most
advanced engineering of the day. Almost inseparable from these
attributes are two more basic factors: Superlative hand workmanship and
limited production. Some classics may excel in body design coupled to a
lesser standard of engineering or vice versa, but all the above
qualities are invariably found in a true classic.

    [Illustration: 1928 Cunningham

    James Cunningham & Sons manufactured finely made, luxury cars in
    Rochester, N.Y. between 1907 and 1936. This early example of the V-8
    engine produced 100 bhp at 2400 rpm. The Cunningham sold for up to
    $9,000.00. In 1970 a close-coupled convertible like this one was
    offered for $38,750.00. Early Cunningham enthusiasts included Mary
    Pickford, Marshall Field, William Randolph Hearst and Harold Lloyd.
    This car was driven for half its trip from Wisconsin to the PIONEER
    AUTO MUSEUM.]

    [Illustration: 1937 Cord

    This 810 Westchester Sedan was manufactured by Auburn Automobile
    Company. Only 2,320 cars of the 810 and 812 model Cord were made. It
    featured front wheel drive, Lycoming V-8 engine, retractable
    headlights and wrap-around grill. A 1937 supercharged model 812
    originally sold for $3,575.00. A supercharged Beverly Sedan is on
    display in another building.]

    [Illustration: 1931 Pierce-Arrow Convertible Coupe

    Headlights sweeping from the fenders in clean, flowing lines mark it
    as a Pierce-Arrow. Bore and stroke were 3½ × 5 inches with a piston
    displacement of 385 cubic inches developing 132 horsepower. Another
    unique feature was pairs of coils, points and condensers allowing
    the 8 cylinder engine to run on four cylinders should the ignition
    fail. Many other unique features of engineering and design mark the
    Pierce-Arrow as a true Classic.]

    [Illustration: 1932 Auburn Boattail Speedster

    This classic beauty manufactured by the Auburn Automobile Company
    between 1903-1937 was guaranteed to have been test driven at more
    than 100 mph. Auburn first began using the two-tone color scheme in
    1925. This yellow and red beauty came with a straight eight Lycoming
    engine rated at 150 H.P. This car was a first place winner at the
    national Auburn-Cord-Duesenberg meet a few years ago.]

    [Illustration: 1928 Packard Convertible Coupe

    This Packard has a straight eight engine, side-mounted spares, disc
    wheels, and a rumble seat. Two other Packards of this classic era,
    both four door phaetons, are also on display in the museum in the
    Classic Building.]




                         Special Interest Cars


To classify as a special interest car it should be distinguished either
by unusual body style, an engineering innovation or some other marked
difference from the routine production of its day. A few of the special
interest cars to be found in the PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM are shown here.

    [Illustration: ROONEY RACER

    The Mickey Rooney Racer was built especially for use in the movie
    “The Big Wheel.” It is powered by a motorcycle engine mounted in the
    rear. The car, bought in California, traveled cross country in its
    own tailor-made car top carrier.]

    [Illustration: 1957 Thunderbird

    The two-seater Thunderbird was built between 1955-1957. The one on
    display at the MUSEUM has an engine with 312 cubic inch
    displacement. The porthole top is detachable, secured by five clamps
    and a convertible top was optional. This car is driven regularly by
    John Geisler, and may be parked in front of the MUSEUM.]

    [Illustration: Kaiser Darrin Roadster DKF-16

    This true roadster manufactured by Willys Motors, Inc., boasts side
    curtains, hidden top, plexiglass wind wings, and sold for $3,668.00.
    The fibreglass body features doors that slide into front fender
    wells and an F head Willys engine. Of the 435 assembly line cars
    built only 226 are known to still exist. If you miss the car in the
    exhibit it is probably parked in front as it is driven regularly by
    Betty Geisler.]




                              Shucks Ma—“
                    Now I can work 40 acres a day!”


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

The Indian stared in amazement, dogs and kids ran for cover and great
grandfather swelled with pride as he drove his new J. I. Case steam
engine across the prairie.

The mechanical age had really arrived as these and many other
smoke-belching behemoths rumbled across the plains of South Dakota years
ago. The “dirt farmer” came into his own, turning over as many as 40
acres of virgin sod a day. He was soon to be recognized as the most
important single factor in feeding a rapidly growing nation. Today’s
farmer, heir to yesterday’s pioneer efforts, finds his role even more
important. A hungry world constantly demanding a greater food supply
leans heavily on the American farmer’s ability to produce more and more.

The giants pictured here have long since retired. But South Dakota is
fortunate to have men of vision who have restored and maintained this
part of our heritage to see and enjoy now and for years to come.

    [Illustration: A Rumley Oil-Pull provides the power to drive one of
    the older threshing machines commonly seen in The wheat country of
    Central South Dakota. This steam powered behemoth provided belt
    drive to run the thresher.]

    [Illustration: An Aultman-Taylor kerosene powered tractor of
    yesteryear. Note the heavy chain behind the front wheels that
    provided the linkage for steering this giant. Typical of early
    equipment, it was all but silent until the drive train was engaged.
    No one was ever known to go to sleep at the switch.]

    [Illustration: Two views of the farm machinery lot at the back of
    the PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM. Dozens of tractors of all vintages are
    represented along with countless other pieces of farm equipment from
    days gone by.]

    [Illustration: no separate caption]




                              Antique Town


“Remember way back when—?” and, “When I was a boy I used to walk five
miles every day to a one room school back in—!” Here are reminders for
those who have made these statements or heard them from the folks. A
true turn-of-the-century main street. How different and complex are
these same things today!

    [Illustration: Two young ladies stand in front of the completely
    equipped barber shop. The other businesses appear to be closed for
    the day so one might guess father is still in the chair doing his
    part in a bit of close harmony.]

    [Illustration: A bank is a bank—unless it’s the one you have done
    business with for years and it is to be dismantled. It could be Mr.
    Geisler “rescued his rescuer” when he bought the old Murdo State
    Bank, teller windows, equipment, safe and all. This was the local
    world of finance fifty years ago.]

    [Illustration: Funerals, weddings and fancy occasions saw this
    “hack” put to use. This is only one of the many interesting things
    to see in the Livery Barn at PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM.]


Everything from barbed wire to groceries to clothing were on the shelves
at the old General Store. The coffee grinder, the cracker barrel and the
glowing pot-bellied stove are there to help your imagination run back
over the years.

    [Illustration: General store]

    [Illustration: General store shelves]

    [Illustration: General store shelves]

    [Illustration: Many a pioneer worshipped his Maker in this small
    country church rescued from abandonment and ultimate destruction. It
    is complete with hymnals, prayer books, altar and other original
    furnishings.]

    [Illustration: This authentic one-room school house is complete with
    books, desks, and Regulator wall clock.]

    [Illustration: Note the double desk and the old stove. Children of
    pioneer days walked or rode horseback for many miles each day to
    attend classes.]

    [Illustration: Made by Wurlitzer about 40 years ago, this is the
    world’s largest Concert Band Organ.]

    [Illustration: All visitors seem to enjoy climbing up to the cab of
    the old C.M & St. P. R.R. caboose. This old veteran of steam-driven
    railroad days was used when South Dakota was first homesteaded. It
    is completely furnished with authentic pot-bellied stove and other
    equipment of its day.]


The PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM opened in May of 1954 with 25 cars and a single
building. As time went on a collection of old farm machinery and
tractors blossomed in back. And as old original buildings such as jails,
schools, churches, banks and many others were doomed to replacement in
the community, Mr. Geisler added yet another facet of olden day
preservation to the museum. China, toys, glassware, lamps, musical
antiquities and other things too numerous to mention here were added. So
many things, in fact, that many buildings such as the general store, the
church, and the school house are fully stocked and equipped with
authentic original trappings. Today the museum boasts 25 buildings with
over 200 vehicles plus thousands of other memorabilia. Because of Mr.
Geisler’s fondness for Ford automobiles, a special building in the
museum, Henry’s Ford Garage, contains only Fords. In 1956 Mr. Geisler
sold the Chevrolet-John Deere Agency and purchased the Ford Agency in
Murdo, which is managed by another son, Dave.

PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM is more than a mere tourist attraction. It is a
tribute to a man and woman and their family who have had the foresight
to preserve the past. The thousands of items to be seen in a fine state
of preservation would have doubtless been lost to the dumps and junk
piles. Instead posterity can visit and maybe “live a little” in the days
of their forefathers in authentic surroundings.

Visit with Dick and John. They will be happy to give you interesting and
expert information on anything in the PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM. They might
even relate a few of the interesting and amusing tales of how the cars
were found and moved from over 40 states to the PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM in
Murdo, South Dakota.

    [Illustration: 1931 Packard Touring Car

    This rare classic was the personal pride of its original owner, Tom
    Mix, hard-riding cowboy of movie fame. The classic features of this
    phaeton included wire wheels, side-mounted twin spares topped by
    rear-view mirrors, dual windshields and dual cowls.]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIONEER AUTO MUSEUM AND ANTIQUE
VILLAGE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
